Added cell-id proposal (#62)
jupyter/enhancement-proposals: 62-cell-id/cell-id.md

## The Motivation for a JEP

The responses to these two questions define requiring a JEP:

*1. Does the proposal/implementation PR impact multiple orgs, or have widespread community impact?*

- Yes, this JEP updates nbformat.

*2. Does the proposal/implementation change an invariant in one or more orgs?*

- Yes, the JEP proposes a unique cell identifier.

This proposal covers both questions.

## Proposed Enhancement

### Adding an `id` field

This change would add an `id` field to each cell type in the [4.4 json_schema](https://github.com/jupyter/nbformat/blob/master/nbformat/v4/nbformat.v4.4.schema.json). Specifically, the [raw_cell](https://github.com/jupyter/nbformat/blob/master/nbformat/v4/nbformat.v4.4.schema.json#L114), [markdown](https://github.com/jupyter/nbformat/blob/master/nbformat/v4/nbformat.v4.4.schema.json#L151), and [code_cell](https://github.com/jupyter/nbformat/blob/master/nbformat/v4/nbformat.v4.4.schema.json#L184) required sections would add the `id` field with the following schema:

```
"id": {
    "description": "A str field representing the identifier of this particular cell.",
    "type": "string",

>     "pattern": "^[a-zA-Z0-9-]+$",
>     "minLength": 2,
>     "maxLength": 36

Reviewer: Suggestion to expand the pattern slightly:

```suggestion
    "pattern": "^[a-zA-Z0-9-_]+$",
    "minLength": 1,
    "maxLength": 64
```

- one-char minimum because I don't see a reason why `1` should be an invalid id, and as-is `map(str, range(len(cells)))` would not be valid otherwise
- allow `_`, so that url-safe base64 (with padding stripped) can produce valid ids. I didn't understand the reason to exclude it, but maybe I missed something?
- expand max length so that e.g. `uuid-suffix` can be a valid scheme. It's easier to use less than all of the space than expand it later

Author: These suggestions seem fine by me to include.

I did some more digging into the `_` case. I originally thought there was a technical constraint that would impact usability in URLs, but it'll just concatenate the id for search engines rather than cause any actual issues these days.

For the scheme were you thinking of `urn:uuid:` as an example prefix?

#### Reason for Character Restrictions (pattern, min/max length)

The [RFC 3986 (Uniform Resource Identifier (URI): Generic Syntax)](https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc3986.txt) defines the unreserved characters allowed for URI generation. Since IDs should be usable as referencable points in web requests, we want to restrict characters to at least these characters. Of these remaining non-alphanumeric reserved characters (`-`, `.`, `_`, and `~`) three of them have semantic meaning or are restricted in URL generation leaving only alphanumeric and `-` as legal characters we want to support. This extra restriction also helps with storage of ids in databases, where non-ascii characters in identifiers can oftentimes lead to query, storage, or application bugs when not handled correctly. Since we don't have a pre-existing strong need for such characters (`.`, `_`, and `~`) in our `id` field, we propose not introducing the additional complexity of allowing these other characters here.

> 

Author: Updated to include `_` in the relevant locations of the doc

> The length restrictions are there for a few reasons. First, you don't want empty strings in your ids, so enforce some natural minimum. We could use 1 or 2 for accepting bascially any id pattern, or be more restrictive with a higher minimum to reserve a wider combination of min length ids (`63^k` combinations). Second, you want a fixed max length for string identifiers for indexable ids in many database solutions for both performance and ease of implemntation concerns. These will certainly be used in recall mechanisms so ease of database use should be a strong criterian. Third, a UUID string takes 36 characters to represent (with the `-` characters), and we likely want to support this as a supported identity pattern for certain applications that want this.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The length restrictions are there for a few reasons. First, you don't want empty strings in your ids, so enforce some natural minimum. We could use 1 or 2 for accepting bascially any id pattern, or be more restrictive with a higher minimum to reserve a wider combination of min length ids (`63^k` combinations). Second, you want a fixed max length for string identifiers for indexable ids in many database solutions for both performance and ease of implementation concerns. These will certainly be used in recall mechanisms so ease of database use should be a strong criterion. Third, a UUID string takes 36 characters to represent (with the `-` characters), and we likely want to support this as a supported identity pattern for certain applications that want this.
```

Reviewer 2: The diff isn't showing up in-line changes (maybe the line is too long?):
- `implemntation` -> `implementation`
- `criterian` -> `criterion`

> The length restrictions are there for a few reasons. First, you don't want empty strings in your ids, so enforce some natural minimum. We could use 1 or 2 for accepting bascially any id pattern, or be more restrictive with a higher minimum to reserve a wider combination of min length ids (`63^k` combinations). Second, you want a fixed max length for string identifiers for indexable ids in many database solutions for both performance and ease of implementation concerns. These will certainly be used in recall mechanisms so ease of database use should be a strong criterion. Third, a UUID string takes 36 characters to represent (with the `-` characters), and we likely want to support this as a supported identity pattern for certain applications that want this.

Reviewer: Update: I realize now that this is specified in the `id` field definition above, but still perhaps appropriate to include the specific restrictions where we explain the rationale behind them.

> The length restrictions are there for a few reasons. First, you don't want empty strings in your ids, so enforce some natural minimum. We could use 1 or 2 for accepting bascially any id pattern, or be more restrictive with a higher minimum to reserve a wider combination of min length ids (`63^k` combinations). Second, you want a fixed max length for string identifiers for indexable ids in many database solutions for both performance and ease of implementation concerns. These will certainly be used in recall mechanisms so ease of database use should be a strong criterion. Third, a UUID string takes 36 characters to represent (with the `-` characters), and we likely want to support this as a supported identity pattern for certain applications that want this.

Author: Added

As an informational data point, the [jupyterlab-interactive-dashboard-editor](https://github.com/jupytercalpoly/jupyterlab-interactive-dashboard-editor/tree/master/src) uses UUID for their cell ID.

### Reference implementation

The nbformat [PR#189](https://github.com/jupyter/nbformat/pull/189) has a full (unreviewed) working change of the proposal applied to nbformat. Outside of tests and the cell id uniqueness check the change can be captured with this diff:

```
diff --git a/nbformat/v4/nbformat.v4.schema.json b/nbformat/v4/nbformat.v4.schema.json
index e3dedf2..4f192e6 100644
--- a/nbformat/v4/nbformat.v4.schema.json
+++ b/nbformat/v4/nbformat.v4.schema.json
@@ -1,6 +1,6 @@
 {
     "$schema": "http://json-schema.org/draft-04/schema#",
-    "description": "Jupyter Notebook v4.4 JSON schema.",
+    "description": "Jupyter Notebook v4.5 JSON schema.",
     "type": "object",
     "additionalProperties": false,
     "required": ["metadata", "nbformat_minor", "nbformat", "cells"],
@@ -98,6 +98,14 @@
     },
 
     "definitions": {
+        "cell_id": {
+            "description": "A string field representing the identifier of this particular cell.",
+            "type": "string",

> +            "pattern": "^[a-zA-Z0-9-]+$",

Reviewer: In the earlier discussion, initial prefixes were mentioned such as not allowing starting with a number (html 4 doesn't allow starting with a number, but html 5 does). Do we want to preserve this requirement, or not? I'm inclined to not and require *implementations* to add `id-` prefixes for urls/etc. as appropriate, but this might be something to mention explicitly.

Author: Good point. I have the same inclination. Let me go look at adding that distinction to the JEP.

             "additionalProperties": false,
-            "required": ["cell_type", "metadata", "source", "outputs", "execution_count"],
+            "required": ["id", "cell_type", "metadata", "source", "outputs", "execution_count"],
             "properties": {
+                "id": {"$ref": "#/definitions/cell_id"},
                 "cell_type": {
                     "description": "String identifying the type of cell.",
                     "enum": ["code"]
```

## Recommended Application / Usage of ID field

1. Applications should manage id fields as they wish within the rules if they want to have consistent id patterns.
2. Applications that don't care should use the default id generation of the underlying notebook save/load mechanisms.
3. When loading from older formats, cell ids should be filled out with a unique value.
4. UUIDs are one valid, simple way of ensuring uniqueness, but not necessary.
    - Lots of large random strings in notebooks can be frustrating
    - 128-bit UUIDs are also vast overkill for the level of uniqueness we need within a notebook with <1000 candidates for collisions. They make for opaque URLs, noise in the files, etc

>     - Human-readable strings are preferable defaults for ids that will be used in links / visible

Reviewer 3: It seems that, given we're recommending this behavior here, that we should implement it in the nbformat library (see https://github.com/jupyter/nbformat/pull/189/files#diff-61deae4d804a6b90b65fc417db8f0d09R38 )

Author: I think that would be the follow-up to do so for that PR to be mergable (along with any other suggested changes) once the JEP is accepted.

5. Uniqueness across notebooks is not a goal.
    - A managed ecosystem might make use of uniqueness across documents, but the spec doesn't expect this behavior

> 6. Users should not need to directly view or edit cell ids.

Reviewer 4: Though, there are applications where being able to view the cell ids would be quite useful. e.g. in nbgrader, being able to report that "the test in cell $CELL_ID failed" is quite useful. You could also imagine similar types of reporting in other applications, like syntax errors, etc.

Reviewer 5: Good point @jhamrick. We weren't clear enough here. Applications would be able to display the Cell ID to the user and make changes if needed. The point that we were trying to convey is that a user (who doesn't need the Cell ID information for some purpose) would not need to view or edit Cell ID in order to use the notebooks.

> 6. Users should not need to directly view or edit cell ids.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
6. Users should not need to directly view or edit cell ids in order to use a notebook (though applications may choose to display the cell id to the user).
```

    - Applications need not make any user interface changes to support the 4.5 format with ids added. If they wish to display cell ids they can but generally they should be invisible to the end user unless they're programmatically referencing a cell.

### Case: loading notebook without cell id

#### Option A: strings from an integer counter

> A valid strategy, when populating cell ids from a notebook on import from another id-less source or older format version, to use e.g. strings from an integer counter. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A valid strategy, when populating cell ids from a notebook on import from another id-less source or older format version, is to use e.g. strings from an integer counter. 
```

In fact, if an editor app keeps track of current cell ids, the following strategy ensures uniqueness:

```python
cell_id_counter = 0
existing_cell_ids = set()

def get_cell_id(cell_id=None):
    """Return a new unique cell id

    if cell_id is given, use it if available (e.g. preserving cell id on paste, while ensuring no collisions)
    """
    global cell_id_counter

    if cell_id and cell_id not in existing_cell_ids:
        # requested cell id is available
        existing_cell_ids.add(cell_id)
        return cell_id

    # generate new unique id

>     cell_id = f"id{cell_id_counter}"

Reviewer: This `id` prefix was added to ensure a valid target in cases where starting with a number is not valid, but since our pattern doesn't currently require that, I think this example should explicitly use:

```suggestion
    cell_id = str(cell_id_counter)
```

to make it clear that pure-numerical, length-1 ids are valid (or make it clear they are not, if we decide they are not!)

    while cell_id in existing_cell_ids:
       cell_id_counter += 1
       cell_id = f"id{cell_id_counter}"
    existing_cell_ids.add(cell_id)
    cell_id_counter += 1
    return cell_id

def free_cell_id(cell_id):
    """record that a cell id is no longer in use"""
    existing_cell_ids.remove(cell_id)
```

#### Option B: 64-bit random id

> If bookkeeping of current cell ids is not desirable, a 64-bit random id (11 chars without padding in b64) has a 10^-14 chance of collisions on 1000 cells, while an 8-char b64 string (48b) is still 10^-9.

Author: Added an additional option with `urlsafe_b64encode` -- thanks for point that out

```python
def get_cell_id(id_length=8):
    # Ok technically this isn't exactly a 64-bit k-length string... but it's close and easy to implement
    return str(uuid.uuid4())[:id_length]
```

#### Option C: Join human-readable strings from a corpus randomly 

> One frequently used pattern for generating human recognizable ids is to combine common words together instead of arbitrarily random bits. Things like `danger-noodle` is a lot easier to remember or reference for a person than `ZGFuZ2VyLW5vb2RsZQ==`. Below would be how this is achieved, though it requires a set of names to use in id generation. There's dependencies in Python, as well as corpus csv files, for this that make it convienent but it would have to add to the install depenencies.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
One frequently used pattern for generating human recognizable ids is to combine common words together instead of arbitrarily random bits. Things like `danger-noodle` is a lot easier to remember or reference for a person than `ZGFuZ2VyLW5vb2RsZQ==`. Below would be how this is achieved, though it requires a set of names to use in id generation. There are dependencies in Python, as well as corpus csv files, for this that make it convenient but it would have to add to the install dependencies.
```

```python
def get_cell_id(num_words=2):
    return "-".join(random.sample(name_corpus, num_words))
```

#### Preference

Use Option B. Option C is also viable but adds a corpus requirement to the id generation step.

## Questions

1. How is splitting cells handled?
   - One cell (second part of the split) gets a new cell ID

> 2. What if I copy and paste (surely you do not want duplicate ids...)

Reviewer 4: "The copied cell should have a new id" --> does this mean that the original cell (the one that was copied) no longer has the same id, i.e. that the original id disappears (since the pasted cell gets a new id too)? This seems counterintuitive---I would think that, like splitting a cell, the copied cell keeps its original ID and the new pasted cell gets a new ID.

Reviewer 5: Sorry for not being clear enough. The source cell would keep the ID and any new cells would receive a new id.

> I would think that, like splitting a cell, the copied cell keeps its original ID and the new pasted cell gets a new ID.

This is the intended behavior albeit not as clearly stated as you :wink:

>    - On paste give the pasted cell a different ID if there's already one with the same ID as being pasted. The copied cell should have a new id

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
   - On paste, give the pasted cell a new ID. The copied (source) cell keeps its original ID.
```

>    - On paste, give the pasted cell a new ID. The copied (source) cell keeps its original ID.

Author: Captured the clearer wording in the document

3. What if you cut-paste (surely you want to keep the id)?

>    - On paste give the pasted cell a different ID if there's already one with the same ID as being pasted. For cut this means the id can be preserved because there's no conflict on resolution of the move action

Reviewer 3: does this mean that the application needs to check all the other cell IDs to make sure that it can paste w/o generating a new one?

Author: Potentially yes. The application could also be a little trickier and keep track of the paste count or something but the simplest is to have a secondary index in memory of IDs being actively used.

Author: Added note about this behavior

4. What if you cut-paste, and paste a second time?
   - On paste give the pasted cell a different ID if there's already one with the same ID as being pasted. In this case the second paste needs a new id
5. How should loaders handle notebook loading errors?

>    - On notebook load, if an older format update and fill in ids. If an invalid id format for a 4.5+ file, then raise a validation error like we do for other schema errors. We could auto-correct for bad ids if that's deemed appropriate.

Author: Ahh that's unfortunate that the application doesn't treat validation errors as errors, I'm not sure we'd change this proposal but can discuss in the PR if we want to adjust what is raised when errored. I was trying this out in classic and it does just warn, then save the file with an invalid format after :/

6. Would cell ID be changed if the cell content changes, or just created one time when the cell is created? As an extreme example: What if the content of the cell is cut out entirely and pasted into a new cell? My assumption is the ID would remain the same, right?
   - Correct. It stays the same once created.
7. So if nbformat >= 4.5 loads in a pre 4.5 notebook, then a cell ID would be generated and added to each cell?
   - Yes.

> 8. If a cell is cut out of a notebook and pasted into another, should the cell ID be retained?

Reviewer 6: I think this guidance is counter to what users would generally prefer and instead the same paste logic as within a single notebook should apply. These ids are notebook-unique and along the lines of 'as stable as possible' I believe they should be passed to new notebooks when possible.

Colab does attempt to maintain IDs when pasting between notebooks which is great when you're debugging a notebook and attempting to narrow something down- it's just fewer things changing.

Also implementation-wise this is a bit more complicated- when putting a notebook cell in the system clipboard it would naturally have the cell ID (to keep it a valid nbformat 4.5 cell), but then one would have to include an identifier of the source notebook to force a new ID when the paste notebook is different.

Reviewer 5: > These ids are notebook-unique and along the lines of 'as stable as possible' I believe they should be passed to new notebooks when possible.

We were looking at the Cell ID in this JEP to focus on a standard within a notebook. Copying a Cell ID to a new notebook would be the application's responsibility to implement as desired. 

We explictly narrowed the scope of the JEP to only focus on an individual notebook to keep things simple. Behavior across notebooks for IDs such as cell id or a notebook id would be better addressed in a future JEP.

Reviewer 7: > We were looking at the Cell ID in this JEP to focus on a standard within a notebook.

The answer below this question, though, does make an opinionated stance on cross-notebook pasting. 

Perhaps the answer should be changed to something like, "This will depend on the application for now, as this JEP only focuses on Cell ID within an individual notebook. Different applications might handle pasting cells across notebooks differently."

Author: I'd be good with changing the description to match something akin to that tomorrow. The answer as written was a suggested behavior when copying within the same notebook, which isn't clearly denoted. Thanks for pointing that out and suggesting a change.

>    - No. Much like copying contents out of one document into another -- you have a new cell with equivalent contends and a new id.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
   - No. Much like copying contents out of one document into another -- you have a new cell with equivalent contents and a new id.
```

9. What are the details when splitting cells?

>    - One cell (preferably the one with the top half of the code) keeps the id, the other gets a new id. This could be adjusted if folks want a different behavior without being a huge problem so long as we're consistent.

Reviewer 3: Similar to @Zsailer's comment above, I guess for splitting cells etc it would also just be up to the application, so long as the notebook at the end of the operation has a collection of cells / cell IDs that adhere to the spec. So "keep the same cell ID for the top half, new cell ID for the bottom half" are more like "suggested solutions for applications to follow" yeah?

Author: Correct -- suggested behavior only. Up to the application so long as cell ids fit the spec and are unique.

Author: Updated to better reflect your question

>    - One cell (preferably the one with the top half of the code) keeps the id, the other gets a new id. This could be adjusted if folks want a different behavior without being a huge problem so long as we're consistent.

Author: reworded to better match this response

## Pros and Cons

Pros associated with this implementation include:

- Enables scenarios that require us to reason about cells as if they were independent entities
- Used by Colab, among others, for many many years, and it is generally useful. This JEP would standardize to minimize fragmentation and differing approaches.
- Allows apps that want to reference specific cells within a notebook
- Makes reasoning about cells unambiguous (e.g. associate comments to a cell)

Cons associated with this implementation include:

- lack of UUID and a "notebook-only" uniqueness guarantee makes merging two notebooks difficult without managing the ids so they remain unique in the resulting notebook

> - applications have to add default ID generation if not using nbformat (or not python) for this (took 1 hour to add the proposal PR to nbformat with tests included)

Reviewer 3: Perhaps we can add a short section to the docs somewhere (nbformat?) that points to the PR that implements this as guidance for folks that want to implement it in JS etc.

Author: I can update the nbformat PR to include a doc reference to the implementation PR.

> - applications have to add default ID generation if not using nbformat (or not python) for this (took 1 hour to add the proposal PR to nbformat with tests included)

Author: Thanks, added these cons to the list

## Relevant Issues, PR, and discussion

Pre-proposal discussion:

- [JEP issue #61: Proposal: 4.5 Format Cell ID](https://github.com/jupyter/enhancement-proposals/issues/61)
- [Notes from JEP Draft: Cell ID/Information Bi-weekly Meeting](https://hackmd.io/AkuHK5lPQ5-0BBTF8-SPzQ?view)
- [nbformat PR#189: Adds this proposal to nbformat](https://github.com/jupyter/nbformat/pull/189)

Out of scope for this proposal (notebook ID):

- [nbformat issue #148: Adding unique ID to the notebook metadata](https://github.com/jupyter/nbformat/issues/148)

## Interested

@MSeal, @ellisonbg, @minrk, @jasongrout, @takluyver, @Carreau, @rgbkrk, @choldgraf, @SylvainCorlay, @willingc, @captainsafia, @ivanov, @yuvipanda, @bollwvyl, @blois, @betatim, @echarles, @tonyfast

---

> # Appendix 1: Additional Information

Reviewer 3: Can you bump all of the Appendix 1 subsections by one level? So we start with `## Appendix 1...` and go from there? Otherwise Jupyter Book will treat it as the same level as the page title.

Reviewer 5: Absolutely. I just noticed the same 👍

pre-proposal period. This appendix highlights this feedback and additional items.

## Pre-proposal Feedback

Feedback can be found in the pre-proposal discussions listed [above](#Relevant-Issues-PR-and-discussion). Additional feedback can be found in [Notes from JEP Draft: Cell ID/Information Bi-weekly Meeting](https://hackmd.io/AkuHK5lPQ5-0BBTF8-SPzQ?view).

[Min's detailed feedback](https://github.com/jupyter/enhancement-proposals/issues/61#issuecomment-672752443) was taken and incorporated into the JEP.

### $id ref Conclusion

We had a follow-up conversation with Nick Bollweg and Tony Fast about JSON schema and JSON-LD. In the course of the bi-weekly meeting, we discussed $id ref. From further review of how the [\$id property](https://json-schema.org/understanding-json-schema/structuring.html#the-id-property) works in JSON Schema we determined that the use for this flag is orthogonal to actual proposed usecase presented here. A future JEP may choose to pursue using this field for another use in the future, but we're going to keep it out of scope for this JEP.

## Implementation Question

### Auto-Update

> A decision should be made to determine whether or not to auto-update older notebook formats to 4.5. Our recommendation would be to auto-update to 4.5.

Reviewer 3: +1 from me
